
**Project Title:** Enhancing Game Segmentation and Recommendations for a Video Game Distribution  Service.

**Authors:** Zach Droog and Juan Toro

**Problem Statement**

Video game distribution services like Steam have become an essential step in video game production lifecycle central the video game industry. To stimulate sales, steam.com displays and recommends games based on their preferences. Therefore, the more accurate these recommendations are, the more likely recommendations will influence users to convert and purchase the product. With the recent pandemic, video game distribution services have seen an increase in user growth and average playtime. This presents an opportunity for the major distribution service to better understand their consumers habits and behaviors. By improving their recommendation algorithm and better understanding their customers wants, it is possible to further optimize the customer experience with the service. 

**End Users**

This project has two core end users. Descriptive insights and text clustering components that describe historical trends and insights of the platforms performance are intended for designated management at Valve (company that owns Steam.com). The game recommendation engine is designed for the full-stack development team that manage the service to improve the game recommendation algorithm that suggests games to players. 

**What prompted you to select this topic?** 

In late 2020, Steam had approximately 120 million monthly active users - which was a significant increase from the 95 million monthly active users during the same period a year prior. Moreover, May 2021 saw the online video game distributor reach a peak of over 25.47 million concurrent users (Clement, 2021). This is a pattern that has been ongoing for Steam and its competitors like Epic Games, Origin, and even console giants like Xbox and PlayStation. Having a personal intertest in video game and video game statistics, we wanted to dive deeper into the data and gain further insights into the historical and current trends in the Steam store. Furthermore, we wanted the challenge of building a refined recommendation engine that can improve user experience and connect new users to new games based on the data provided. This will give Steam a competitive edge over its competitors for acquiring and retaining users. 

**How did you clean the dataset? What were your major challenges in data cleaning?**

The dataset we found was already in a cleaned state. However, there were additional datasets available that contained the game description text data and the web links to the games image banner. Therefore, these datapoints had to be merged to the primary file by joining them on the game id. A challenge we faced was that the data we sourced from Kaggle did not include a data dictionary, which led to confusion around what certain columns represented and their respected units. For example, average playtime was numeric, and the units could not be discerned and therefore could not be reliably included in the analysis. 


**How did you model the dataset? What were your major challenges in data modeling?**

When developing the model for the recommendation engine, we combined different text fields together into a combined content feature that would then be fed into a text vectorizer algorithm to be tokenized and scored. Recommendations for a given game were generated by calculating the cosine similarity between each games combined content input and comparing them. If games are similar, then their cosine values will be closer to 1. If games are not similar, then cosine vales will be closer to 0. The front facing output however represents this as a % similar like other recommendation engines do.

In addition to trying different combined content inputs, we also tested the accuracy of different NLP algorithms like TFIDF Transformer and Count Vectorizer; each of which scored inputs slightly differently. Count vectorizer works by counting the number of times a word appears in the text input (integer) while the TFIDF Transformer performs a similar function but also normalizes these counts (floats). In the end, the count vectorizer approach yielded the best results and most accurate recommendations. 

One of the challenges faced when building the model was the size of the dataset and processing power of our computers. Because of this, we constrained the dataset used in the recommendation engine to only recommend or get recommendations for the games which had received over 1, 000 positive ratings leaving only 2,213 games for the model to analyze. We recognize this as a limitation but note that it can handle the full dataset with enough computing power. However, if this were to be deployed on steam, the model would have to be refined to significantly reduce computation strain and improve run-times. 

**Suppose the end user will adopt your provided solution. Explain briefly how it will benefit them?**

By adopting our provided solution, the full-stack development team will be able to further refine their game recommendation engine and algorithms that it uses to suggest new games to players. The benefit of an improved recommendation engine has advantages for new and existing users that will serve to aid in the retention of active users from selecting rival providers. For new users, an improved recommendation engine provides the opportunity to expose them to the games that they will most enjoy based on their user preferences and inputs. This ensures that the first experience is a positive one and will make the user put trust in the algorithms recommendations when it suggests new games. Similarly, the benefit of an improved recommendation engine for existing users is that it can expose them to games that fit their preferences but may be overlooked by the previous algorithm. This has the bonus of providing exposure to smaller developers and publishers, which will strengthen the business relations between Valve and potential future clients.